So last time we
last time we talked about the building
blocks for sequential logic. Um now
especially we talked about SRE reg D uh
D flip-flop which is actually the
register right those are the concept we
talked last time. So this time we're
starting to really talk about how to
design a sequential logic. Then for your
the chips that you are using every day
pretty much every chip you use is
sequential logic. None of them are
really simple combination logic. For
very very early days those uh very
simple chips that can be combination
logic on its own. But today if you use
something like a computer or something
really have some control logic in it.
It's all sequential logic. Okay. So
what's the uh definition for sequential
logic and especially what's the
difference between sequential logic and
combination logic. So for sequential
logic it's still digital circuit. So we
care about zeros and ones. There's no
other value. Then the output previously
the output depends only on the input.
This time the the output depends on the
prior state. So there's a internal state
then we change the state then the state
can keep updating keep updating until
eventually we get the final result. Then
some the state update um can come from
the state update can come from the
output of the previous state. Right? The
so the next state is calculated by the
previous state. So then we know where to
go for the next state.
Okay. Then we typically have a feedback
signal. The feedback signal forms a loop
so that it becomes the next state value.
And we have a clock signal. Uh the clock
signal determines when we need to update
and how fast we can update the state.
Okay. So last time we talked about the
building blocks including SR latches. Um
so it has two signals. So one is set
signal and one is reset signal. For set
signal whenever is one Q immediately
becomes one. And for reset signal
whenever that one become when reset is
one the Q becomes zero and Q prime
becomes one. But if S and zero are zero
S and R are zero then the Q will
maintain the previous state. Then no
matter
um the Q will maintain its original
state. It will not change.
Then uh as a update we have D latches.
This is still SR latches but D latches
works in a way that uh if the set signal
is zero then no matter what how D
changes Q will give its previous state
right so when the set zero is one Q
follows this value almost immediately
this is D latch so D latch has two mode
one is the hold mode one is the follow
mode right or the latch mode the latch
mode will keep the original value the
follow mode will just make Q equals to
D. The next we talk about B flip-flop.
Now by connecting two D latches
together. So one holds the up when clock
equals to one and the other one holds
when clock equals zero and makes the Q
only changes only follows this value at
the clock boundary when we have a rising
edge or a down edge. It depends on the
setup depends on where you is either
going which one is the
uh which one. So if your clock set clock
is directly input to the first one then
the not gate goes this way then it goes
um the down edge then otherwise it goes
the up edge it only triggers at up edge
then it holds both when clock equals one
and zero and Q only change once per
cycle.
And then the flip-flop is nothing
special uh but a register. And the
register is something that we can store
one bit of data, right? Because what's
the data we're actually storing is the
this value this value at the previous
clock boundary.
Okay, that's the data that we stored in
that moment.
So one register stores one bit of data.
And if you consider say you want to
store two million bytes of data that's
basically 16 million registers the
registers are very very small. Um so on
normal chip it have millions of
registers is very common but still it's
a scarce resources. It should not be
wasted. It should be carefully budgeted
and to decide to what data that you
really need to record there.
So then we're talking about synchronous
logic design and uh this is the type of
uh combin sequential logic that we're
talking about. So um we have a register
then a combination logic and this
combination logic can process data and
feed into another group of register.
This group of register holds the data
and the next group of combination logic
can process it and can pass it forward.
Okay, already here you can see some sort
of pipeline structure there and then
later on we're going to really talk
about the pipeline in uh CPU course.
Then
um we also talk about sequential logic
design with a feedback loop and the
clock signals. So we we assume all the
registers update at the same time,
right? So the whole calculation you can
consider it like synchronized that
update update update then they never
update at another time they always
calculate new result at cycle cycle
boundary so that makes simulation
actually pretty easy that you don't
really need to consider what change in
between you only need to say oh I'm
modeling this I'm replicating the
behavior of this sequential logic this
combinial logic and this combination
logic and We use the previous state to
calculate next state. Then when we get
the next state, we just write into the
register at the same time for simulation
purposes. Right? So it's a uh it's
naturally a discrete event driven
simulation. So that we only simulate at
those clock boundaries, right? We don't
even need to consider oh if this is
clock boundary or not. We just call it
cycles. At cycle one something happened,
cycle two something happened, right? So
basically we just cycle cycle zero cycle
one then we update all the combination
logic cycle one cycle two we update all
the combination logic on and on then we
can simulate a digital circuit rather
easy. So then just just by the way what
is asynchronous logic design? So
asynchronic logic design uh also exist
and it's actually quite common. It's
more common than you think. So consider
or chip right or CPU chip you may
probably hear something like or CPU
works at a frequency or GPU works at
another frequency then or memory works
at another frequency
right so they can still communicate with
each other so actually your if you
consider whole system as a digital
circuit it's not synchronous logic
design it's asynchronous but then that
requires some like synchronization to
guarantee that the data can pass through
then can there's no conflict there's no
overriding it's a little bit complex and
it's not the main goal of this uh this
lecture but I just want to let you know
that there exist such system and
especially in your CPU GPU and memory
sometimes your CPU is very busy but it
doesn't really need a lot of data so
increase the CPU frequency but keep the
memory frequency low to save energy it's
a very common u practice for modern
chips
Okay. Then so the main goal of today's
lecture is talk about how the
sequential logic are designed and the
key technique we use is state machine.
So is the method to design sequential
logic circuits and we start with an
example. The example is a traffic light.
A traffic light light on the on
university roads. Okay. We have several
things. We have lights. Now we consider
light B, LB and LA, right? There are two
LA because they can share the same
signal. If they're red, they're always
red together. So we can just have one
signal that duplicate and use two wires
to send to two different lights. Then LB
are another set of signal. Then we also
have TA and TB.
Okay. So TA and TB what's TA and TB is a
sensor to detect if there are cars or
not. Okay. So our rule is um
if let's say in the case we have L a A
is green and B is red. Now when we
detect there's no car on the a side then
we switch we give a yellow light first
then later on switch to green here and
the red here okay we just detect if
there's car or not just a simple example
I explain it with states
okay so
whenever we design a system the first
thing no matter it's a software system
hardware system. The first thing you
need to ask is what's the input and what
is output. Then you evaluate this type
of system if it's possible by intuition
that if this input can determine the
output, right? At least in a simple way
that like maybe the not the best way to
determine the output but at least the
input provides sufficient information
for the output to to be generated.
Right? So you first need to clear what
is the input and what is the output and
the TA and TBR sensors LA and LB are
lights. You draw this type of block
diagram to clear what is um the input
and output.
Here we consider TA to be a single bit
signal right car there or car not there
right TB also single bit signal L needs
to be a bus. So how many bet are there?
Two, right? Because there are three
different possible cases. Red, green,
yellow. And if you want to encode it, if
it's
if it's more than two and lower than
four, then we have two bits, right? If
it's there are four state, then we start
to need three bit.
Four state can also have two bits. There
are five bit. Five state, then we need
three bit.
Okay. So we consider what's the possible
cases. It's not we cannot have both red
and we cannot have both green. Right? In
that case we set we say LA is red, LB is
green. L red, LB yellow. LB red, LA
green, LB red. Those are all the
possible states. No other cases. Only
four possible states. Then we draw these
possible states to represent as state as
as states.
The state zero is LA green LB red. State
one is LA yellow lb red.
Then it's symmetrical. On this side is L
red, LB green. On this side we have
yellow, L red, and LB yellow. Okay, four
different cases and four different
states. So we use a simple style of
encoding.
Then consider the the all the possible
states to represent
the
the pos all the possible combination of
or output
states. I'm reusing this word state. So
we're encoding all the possible states.
Then we consider how these states
transit. Then um so for digital circuit
pretty much everything that you can be
can be considered as a state. Then uh
and typically there are not a lot of
states in one unit and in one unit if
there are too many states then you
probably need to consider to break it
down into multiple components otherwise
it's just becoming too complex.
Right? Okay, then let's go this way.
We may have a state transition from S0
to S1. And this state transition has a
requirement. What's the requirement? Is
TA prime. I call it TA prime. That means
there's TA is not sensing any car there,
right? There's no more car passing
through the traffic light A.
If that is true or TA is zero then we
consider that we transit from that state
to the next state.
Now on the second case we need to
consider we probably need to maintain
green state. So the state arrow can
point back. So this state transition can
point to itself and if there's car
passing through we want to stay in the
green state.
Okay. Now we keep going. So this case
when it's yellow we consider it stays
there at for one cycle. Okay, just simp
simplification. It stays there for one
cycle. Then we unconditionally move to
this state. LA turns green, red and LB
turns green.
Then it becomes symmetrical. Then when
there's no car for light B, we switch to
state three. And when there's car still
going out, then we switch to
uh we stay at S2. Similarly, if we hit
S3, we stay there for one cycle, then we
move on to S0
and it forms a cycle.
Okay, this is a simple logic or of our
input. Then this is a analysis process
that you first need to consider how your
system works. Now what are the states
possible?
Then just think about traffic light or
something like supply chain. It's
actually something rather common for
um common ways to understand how
computer system works. For example,
traffic lights, right? Then you have
something like a bus. This is a bus in
the term of network, right? It's not a
bus of multiple bits like LA and LB. So
a bus is a a group of wires that are
shared by multiple input. then or
sometimes multiple outputs right so if
just let's make it simple multiple
inputs and when there are multiple
inputs and all of them want to send to
data to the signal to the destination
then we need an abiter to decide who can
send right that this abiter can do the
arbitration to decide who have the right
of the way and in this case it's
actually very similar to this type of
green light red light type of control
it's just probably there are more
intersection sections that you can only
select the one to go, right? There may
be probably even gaps between this
sending process so that you can like
safeguard so that two control signal
never collide with each other.
Also another common um ways to
understand computer architecture is to
to compare things to the supply chain.
Say one supplier, one retailer buys
something from a um manufacturer, right?
So your core is a retailer really needs
data. Your your memory is a manufacturer
can really provide the data. So how
what's your bandwidth? How fast that you
can provide the data to the destination
is something that you really need to
consider. So that's why we studied these
type of examples.
Okay. Let's say
we once we have this type of state
machine right what we can do is we can
draw we can connect the inputs with
current state and next state to form
another sort of truth table right and
the truth table have many axis that
means the cases that we don't care so
for example there's a one special case
Um
so S3 to S0 right S3 to S0 for both
cases we don't care we don't care what's
the input that's something that
transition must happen there are some
also interest that are not in this table
for example S0 to S sub2 because S0
never directly transit to L2 those are
cases that we don't need to consider we
only need to consider when there's a
real arrows transition arrows. So there
are six arrows then we have six entries.
Then next thing is we need to encode the
state. How to encode a state? It's very
simple. We just put zero and once. So we
say we need two bits to encode a state.
We just decide say S0 is 0 0 s1 0 1 s2
is 1 z s3 is 1 one just 0 1 2 3 to
represent their encoding. Okay. This is
current state and the next state. I
think it's um pretty clear about what's
going on, right? And it maps back to
what's the
output, right? We also need to encode
the output. And I say L 0 is green, 01
is yellow, and one Z is red. And those
are the input. And this is another set
of more complex truth table to say oh if
this is our current state and this is
our input the next state will become
this value the output will become this
set of values.
Okay there are different ways to
represent that state.
Okay. So once we understand the whole
process we can start to design
circuit.
Then what we'll talk about sequential
logic. Sequential logic have two
main components. One is the state or the
register. The register stores which
state we were on and we will be and the
combination logic will do the processing
and do the calculation.
Right? So here we have this state.
Right? The current state the current
state it's a register. So just consider
there's two registers. These two
register one stores as zero and one
stores as one. Their output their Q will
stay there so that the CL will process
this data for the whole cycle. Okay, it
will have a lot a long time to process
this data. Then once it calculates the
data it will output as n as next zero as
next one as input as the d signal to the
register.
Okay.
So those are the d signal. Then when the
clock signal arrives when the clock
right rising edge arrives
S0
becomes SN0 S1 becomes SN1 then the
combination logic will have a little bit
time to calculate the new result then
becomes the next state.
Okay, it's a loop.
Any questions?
So there's a this the register is a
separation, right? So the all the so so
let's say if your cycle is 1 second,
right? If your cycle is 1 second then
very likely at the beginning your output
let's say SN will jitter for a little
time
will jitter for a little time then it
will eventually arrive at the value that
you want to have right so this is
s n0
okay now what about
what about S0.
Now S0 then assuming it starts from here
right from zero then it will only change
at this moment because S0 s N0 is one at
this moment it will rise at one at the
clock boundary.
Okay then at this point there will be
some jitter again but this one will stay
there.
It will stay there. This one will jitter
again will drop to zero.
Okay. Then at two second or the second
clock signal then this one becomes zero
and getting stable.
Okay. Just trying to help you review the
how the register works at this stage. So
the register isolates the input and the
output and keep the output of this
register stable for the whole cycle. Now
we call this we memorize the previous
states.
This process is we memorize
this previous state. We just keep this
state and log this state for there.
Okay.
So now we have the true stable. Now once
you have a true stable is getting into
your comfort zone. You know a truce
table can be easily converted to a
combination logic right. So then this
time that we do the conversion that you
should be very comfortable with this
whole process that you can either use
boolean expressions or deriving the
equation or use the kernel map to do the
simplification. Then we can get this
result as s1
x or zero right
s0. And this one probably we just have
no way to simplify right then we just
need a complex
equation there needs many gates there.
Okay. Then the other thing is we can
calcul previous previously this thing
this equations can calculate the next
state
but we also need some processing to
convert the current state to the output.
So here I'm hiding something that shall
we use the current state as the input or
shall we use the next state as the input
or shall we use the current state and
input as the input to the out for the
output. Let's just make it simple for
now. Let's use the current state as the
input to calculate output. Next state is
not
it's not probably not very good. Right?
We can either use the current state or
the current state plus input.
Okay. So
output combination logic. Now just
drawing this as two different
componential logic.
This were the original
combination logic for calculating the
next state goes back.
This is the output calculating
combination logic.
Now we take the S1 and S0 then calculate
L1 at L A and LB. So just consider this
as a system
itself. What's the input? Input is S0
and S1, right? What's the output is LA
and LB. So the question that you need to
ask at this moment is is it
deterministic or not? Or can we decide
LB
from S0 and S1?
Then the quick answer is yes, we can
right because we have this true stable
written there. We have all the possible
combination written there. So by the
way, L and LB are two buses. So there
are basically four output here. Two
input, four output.
Okay, so remember last time
if there are two input then we only need
one gate to calculate one output. So at
the most we need four gates there. So if
we do not consider not gate as a gate.
Okay. So what's the output logic? I'm
simply write it down. It's pretty
straightforward.
Okay.
So we write down everything all the
equations. Now we have
four input. Four input as S1, S0 and TA
and TB. Four input.
Six output. SN1, SN0, L A1, L A Z, LB1,
LB0.
Four input, six output. That's our
calculation. Then we can draw this
circuit in a very simple way like this.
So then we start to simplify a register
or a group of register in this type of
symbol is controlled by clock.
Okay.
So then we draw the
the type of circuit that calculates next
state on this part. The next state
combination logic on this part. the
output combination logic of this part.
Okay, comfortable with the whole
process.
Probably take some time for you to
memorize and for you to become skillful.
Now I will have more examples, more
complex examples.
We just want to let you understand the
whole process. Let's remember from the
problem to a system diagram input
output. Now we can summarize what are
the state and start to draw this state
transition diagram. We have this stage
transition diagram. We convert into this
states transition truth table
that there's a hidden process that's
encoding the current state next state or
encoding the states and encoding the
output. With this truth table, it
becomes a combination logic design. We
just need to specify what is the in
exact input and what is the exact
output. But the worst the case is just
treat this four as input and treat this
six as output and design one combination
logic. That's okay,
right? Then
that's okay. Yeah. Then we can move on
to
simplify the equations. Write the
equation. Write the equation. Make the
simplest form. Then eventually it
converts into a
circuit that we can draw.
Okay. Quick summary. I already done a
quick summary. Just go through these
steps again. Designing a sequential
logic. The step list the possible
output. List the possible state broad
state transition diagram. Encode state
and out state and output and list the
state transition state as a truth table
and use state transition table to
generate and simplify the blind
expression and finally draw the circuit.
Okay, that's the whole process of how
you can design a sequential logic.
Think about host. Yeah,
the combination logic itself is not very
useful. But as you see a big part is
combination logic here. So that's why we
have to introduce combination logic
first. Then we can introduce sequential
logic.
Everything works in cycles. almost
there's no way that you can directly
figure out to the result.
Okay,
just consider that if you know what
exactly each cycle can happen is a user
press a button and this button goes into
the CPU goes into some memory then goes
to uh the GPU then render then goes back
to the screen. The whole process is a
group of sequential logic. Okay. So just
want to want you to the most important
at this stage is feel comfortable that
these type of things can be designed and
can be break down into pieces and
eventually these pieces combined
together can build something super
complex.
Okay.
So if you have unlimited budget and
unlimited time for now you can already
build a CPU and there are a lot of more
things to do.
Let's talk how about this we I I
intentionally separate these two
combination logic but if you combine
into one is it okay then in term of
drawing this diagram it's definitely no
big problem right um they're equivalent
but there are special
ways to understand this there are
special terms so the left side is called
a more machine and the right side is
called millius machine is basically the
people who
created this type of machine and name
this type of things.
Okay. So what is Morris machine? Morris
machine is a state machine where the
output only depends on the input.
Sorry.
Morse machine is where the output only
depends on the state. It doesn't depends
on the input.
Okay, Millie machine is a machine that
the output depends on both the input and
the state.
So we know in this this case
the T and TB changes won't actually
immediately trigger LA and LB. It will
take effect. The earliest time is the
next cycle.
Okay, on this side it will immediately
change the LA and LB the output.
Okay, so I want to want you to imagine
what's the advantage and the
disadvantage of these two different
machines.
Probably already said one.
milling machine will change output
immediately even without waiting for the
next cycle. Right?
So that make that means mill machine has
the advantage of faster response lower
latency.
Okay.
Morse machine has longer latency.
Also as this combination logic is more
capable in many cases when we have four
bit or five bit or even more bit we
typically need fewer state to represent
the state machine.
Okay. We need fewer states. That means
we need we have fewer bits. Now we have
fewer bits. Then we have fewer steps of
the transition table.
Okay. Then we can have faster response,
faster latency here. So mini machine has
fewer registers because it requires
fewer state. It's more concise and has
lower latency because it can respondse
faster. Lower latency comes from two
sides. One is it can immediate response
from the input. The other side is
because there are fewer register, fewer
states, the transition table is simpler.
So we need fewer steps to arrive at the
the stage that we can get the result.
Okay,
the morse machine is simpler because we
separate these two
combination logic. that each combination
logic is simpler because the register
there are not a lot of design that we
can do with the register or mainly
design their combination logic. So
design and debugging are much simpler
for Morris motion,
right? And also the output only changes
at the clock edges. That means
if your TA and TB are not controlled by
a register, sometimes we consider those
as glitches or jitters that can just go
up and down. That is not intentional.
Okay. So more slow is simpler, more
stable. The milling machines take is
more uh saves more resources, more
energy and provides faster uh response.
So in reality both are being used and
they are equivalent. So there are method
that you have one system that you can
convert into another system. Sometimes
for a simple system like traffic light
control system there's probably no
difference but with a more complex
system it can have difference. Um and
they're both used that for different
situation.
Okay. So I would say mill machine is
probably more optimized. If you care
about extreme performance then use mill
machine. Then if you don't care about
the extreme performance you just like
this your first version of design use
more machine.
I can I don't have concrete examples
then if you need concrete example we can
talk about concrete examples
uh but here
because this combination logic is more
capable
right so it's just an intuitive
understanding of why this need require
fewer fewer
registers. So we can have fewer
information provided on this side and
more information provided on that side
that eventually we can also determine
the output.
Okay. Uh our textbook has examples uh
for how to convert a more machine to
mill machine and why mill machine has
fewer bits. Just example and you can
you can go with you can just check that
one. Okay, check the textbook for
examples.
Okay,
I think we should have enough enough
time to finish today's content.
Okay, so let's consider another example,
more complex example.
uh unlock the door with four numbers. We
know the four numbers, right? So, we
need these four numbers, four correct
numbers. Let's say make it simple 1 2 3
4 to be typed in the right order. If we
type 1, two, five, then immediately it's
going to the wrong look, it's wrong,
right? Then we just we need to type 1 2
3 4 again to unlock.
Okay, so we need these four four digits
to be consecutive so that we can unlock
the door. So how we can design this type
of digit circuit and still a simplified
implementation of this type of system
but just a demo. So we unlock door with
four uh
we unlock the door with four numbers
then
probably eventually I didn't design this
wrong number and X button handling I uh
did I
okay not a big problem let's look at
this state machine so this is a more
realistic state machine that we
typically start with idle state two.
Then uh the probably the first thing
when you define a state machine is to
consider those cases those states that
are impossible.
Now what are impossible cases? So just
consider there are a lot of impossible
states. Then so sometimes just your
system may just go crazy and go to some
wrong state. So what we do is for every
state every other state that we're now
drawing here we just point back to the
idle so that we can restart from the um
the process. So every this type of
system of state machine typically have
this reset signal that whenever
something happen always go back to the
idle state. Okay let's look at this idle
state. If nothing happens we stay at
idle
right. But if
the right number is the correct number
is pressed, we go to C1. If the wrong
number is pressed, we go to E1.
Okay. Then from any point we have two
different ways to go. If it's correct,
we go to C2. For if wrong, we go to E2.
The correct we go to C3. The wrong we go
to E3. And for C3, we have two different
cases. describe we go to unlock. Unlock
is a transient state. A transient state
that means it's a hidden state that a
user may not really need to know about
this state. But we use this state to
trigger output signal. Okay. Then if you
consider a milling machine, a milling
machine can skip this signal, right?
Because the input and the state and C3
C3 state with the pre the next correct
input can already trigger the analog
signal.
But here let's consider Morris machine
more machine in Morris machine we need
this analog state because we need this
particular state to trigger that output
signal. Still correct we go to unlock if
it's wrong we go to idle. Okay then
after unlocking go back to idle. So
still a simplified design. And this this
type of algorithm is not only used for
hardware design and for something like
uh typing a password without input box
without enter key and this is typically
commonly used in software design that we
consider a state machine that we just
require user to type this particular um
particular string in in a sequence. Even
for some sequence matching then we use
this type of state machine to represent
which one that we matched until this
point.
Okay. Then we go back to this digital
design process and we start to do state
encoding. Okay. So this type this time
we almost almost never h we don't even
have output. We only have one output
that is the unlock signal. Right? And
the unlock signal is so simple that it's
triggered in this state. Then for other
state or unlock signal is
or unlock signal is um
or unlock signal is zero. So we don't
unlock.
Okay.
So then we start to draw this state
transition table. So from every state
now I also put the state name and the
encoding.
Okay. And for the input that's the input
that I'm writing there. Just a simple
simple
uh simple way to represent input. There
are many many many cases that is
collapsed in this other group station.
Anything else that is type is going to
other this state. Now we have encoding
just a very very complex state table a
truth table
then write down equation not a lot of
chance to simplify
and
this part.
So then we can
draw this type of
we can write down this type of equation.
Then we can type every state output
right every output state next state
every bit and we can write down
equation. Then we know uh
how we can draw the circuit how we can
design this circuit.
I I'll skip this part. Okay. Another
thing you need to do is to derive the
finite state machine from circuit.
Then this part is actually simpler than
for example we have this type of circuit
then we have a clock and we have a
reset. Then so it's first time you see a
reset
it's very common for a register to have
reset or I should say it's more common
to have a reset than not to have a
reset.
So for reset is typically if something
goes wrong we need to go back to the
default state. In the previous case is
the idle state. For most of group of
registers there's always a set of uh
default state. Then this is the circuit.
Okay.
Then what we can do the analog signal
is S1 right? It's directly connected to
S1. So very similar to the previous
example
the N1 we can write down the equation
because we know the gates we can read
the gates and write down the expression
we also have a zero there. So the next
task is simply write the truth table the
other way around. We just how we write
it. We say s1, s0, a1, a z are input,
right? Then as n n n n n n n n n n n n n
n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n
n n n n n n n n one and n zero are
output
and we just put down all the possible
cases just for systematic way we write
consider this includes a number there's
0 1 2 3 4 all the way to 15 just write
down these numbers this way now we just
manually calculate every step then put
down this output there okay then
we Say
we decode the state. For example, S0 s1
s0 is a state 0 0. We just simply write
as state zero 0 as state zero. Say one
state two state two. And it's actually
very interesting that there's no state
three for output.
Right? There's no state three for
output. That means it's this state
machine is actually a three-state state
machine. There's no state three. Okay,
there's no state three. So we write down
this expression. Then we can draw this
table here.
S0.
When a not equal to three, we go back.
When a equals 3, we go to s1. And when a
not equal to s a a when a doesn't equal
to one we go back. When a equals to one
we go here. Now when we arrive s2 s2
becomes one. It's you remember the
unlock signal.
This this is state two right for state
two the higher bit has number one. The
high whenever the higher bit has number
one we directly unlock.
Okay. a
twodigit passcode.
This much smaller example. Two
twodigit passcode and we know the what's
the digit is three and one.
Okay. Then we go back to say zero. Then
you can see
for state three something that we don't
really care. It can go back to other
states. That's okay.
Okay.
So,
now we start with building blocks. Now,
I'm only going to talk about one
building block today. Counter. Counter
is just so commonly used that can be
converted into forms that you can almost
never cannot ever you probably cannot
recognize. Okay, now we start to have
more symbols and I just trying to trying
to help you understand these symbols.
These symbols is easy to understand.
This is a register
and we know the input is n bit and
output is n bit. That means this is the
n bit register.
We don't specify mbit. Now here this
plus sign which is a plus sign with this
this symbol. This symbol typically
represents ALU. This arithmetic logic
unit.
Okay. Now we'll talk about alou a lot in
the CPU design. This is a alou. Whenever
you see this symbol is a group of
combination logic that can do the
calculation.
Sometimes it can also represent com
sequential logic. It requires multiple
steps when we draw a diagram at a very
high level. But anyway here this is a
combination logic that can that can sum
numbers out. So here we only put number
one as input here.
Uh in this particular example yes and it
can only do plus operation.
In
particular case it's just simplified
understanding actually you see we here
has a n there right that actually we
don't even need this input right we
don't even need this in clock signal is
good enough for this input so it's just
a block diagram
okay
so here we really need then just plus
one plus And it's it's actually much
simpler than a real adder
now. Okay. And there's a reset. Whenever
we press the reset, it becomes zero.
Okay. So you can also understand this as
a finite state machine. It's just a very
complex finite state machine. So it has
2 to the^ of n minus one state. Start
from state zero. There are many many
states, right? And the transition is
also very simple. it can just simply go
up. If you consider reset, then all of
them can go back to zero. But if you
don't consider reset, then all of them
can go back to uh you just it's just a
circle. It's a big loop. Okay. So, mbit
uh mbit counter if you are interested,
you can also try to derive the equation
and draw the combination logic there.
But I just wanted you to take a counter
as a mature block that we can use for
some other cases.
Okay. So what are the other cases?
So one use case is this thing called
frequency divider.
Uh for example we have a clock signal
that works at one megahertz.
Uh now our LED flashes at about 05
seconds and 05 seconds 05 seconds on and
05 seconds off. Then we can use a 20 bit
counter. It's a little bit hard to
calculate.
This is really hard to calculate.
By the way, let me ask you this thing.
This is a few numbers that you need to
remember.
2 to the power of 10, 2 to the^ of 20, 2
to the^ of 30. What are those values?
It's 1024, right? Or we simply write as
1K.
So then you may guess this one,
this one is one mega, right?
I can't remember this one. I can never
remember this one. This is one giga. 2
to the^ 40 is one terra by 50 is one pa
and so on. Right? So just simple way to
represent this
relationship. That's why we know each
phase runs at one MHz then 20 bit
counter is good enough. Okay. Then
remember the previous example here we
use the highest bit to control
the light or the the lock the unlock
signal. Here we can simply do the same
thing
for half of the time we have highest bit
equals one. For half the time have
highest bit equals to zero.
cover with witness.
Okay. So with half of time that is one
half time is zero. Then we can
exactly control half and half time.
Okay. This is one of the simplest
representation.
Then there's a way that we can calculate
number of bits to use and um
uh the frequency that we can get
that. So basically using this method you
can use
um you can get any frequency you can
start with any frequency and get any
other frequency as long as your
frequency is lower than the original
value. You cannot rise the frequency but
you can you can reduce the frequency.
The one thing that you may know is
um
remember those type of toy watches.
Those toy watches are actually quite
accurate. But right there's a piece of
crystal that crystal runs at a actually
very very high frequency at a very high
frequency. Then this frequency can drive
some type of circuit. And how we can
convert this high frequency into the
second sign that grows second by second
and basically we use this type of
counter so that we can reduce the
frequency and to get the value that we
want. It only require a few registers.
So even for one MHz reduced to one hertz
we only need 20 something registers. Not
a lot of registers.
Okay, another thing of the direct
uh
extension of the frequency tuner is this
PWM
or pulse width modulation signal
generator.
Can you give me an example how this is
used? In what case this is used?
Yeah. Um
what's that
sense?
What the senses?
This sound
can speak it louder.
Great sound.
Yeah. So it it can be used to control
the volume of a sound.
um
synthesizer. I guess that's something
that you want to say is to
say t tune the pitches of a sound and
actually not really because the
frequency will not change in this case.
The frequency is fixed. If you look at
the upper edge or the down edge, up edge
and down edge, the the gap is the same.
We're not changing. We're only changing
the duty cycle.
So one use case is our phone and
computer for most of the time to tune
the brightness of the screen. It's
actually done by this way.
Okay, you just turn how long time is
turned on and how long time is turned
off. That's why some people if they're
super sensitive, they can feel it's
actually blinking. For many people they
cannot feel. Then another example I can
give you is robotics.
In robotics how we can control let's say
robotic arm. This is a motor here.
Right? So what angle that we want it to
go is done by this type of things. So
they have a say 50 duty duty cycle is
the neutral position. Then 25 is
probably 90 degree this way. 25 75 is 90
degree that way. Okay. So that this
controls motors.
Some examples of how these type of
signals are used. So how this is done
is done by adding a combination logic
that I simply write a greater than sign.
So greater than sign is when when it's
greater than certain value. Say if this
counter can count up to 1 million then
if it's greater than half a million then
it's a 50% duty cycle and if it's
greater than 75% of the a million then
75% duty cycle okay but this threshold
is an input that can be controlled then
we can generate this type of um
this type of PWF signals this requires
our counters to really have a high value
the high the high
the clock to be really fast have a high
frequency clock. The higher the
frequency the finer granularity that we
can tune this PWM signal there.
Okay, one example. Another example is a
counter
sorry not a counter a button press
detection.
So what is a button press detection?
Then if you have try to use a breadboard
to have a button then to turn on a light
or to have a to control
another counter say press
add one press add one
it's actually very very hard I really
tried myself when I was undergraduate
student just directly connect a button
to a counter
one price can go up to 10 hundreds of
thousands. Why? Because you think it's
just two piece of metal that touches
together, right? But internally it's
this voltage go up and down, go up and
down many many times and every time it
goes to goes up it's considered as being
triggered and it adds value by one.
Every time it's triggered then we add
this value by one.
So what we can do with it?
We can do what we can do is we only want
to say when user press it for a longer
enough time and this longer enough time
is probably only one millisecond and
even 1 millisecond consider if it's a
one megahertz clock signal then that
that means we need to count until
a certain threshold then we can consider
this is really being pressed right. So
that means for if it stays on for a
certain amount of time, if it stays on
for a certain amount of time, we really
consider that this user pressed on this
button. So how can we can know that it
stays as on for this long time is by a
counter.
So we put a clock signal here and we put
a enable signal here. So we call this is
enable. This is actually the input,
right? What this enable is doing is
actually the clock signal is the input
this time. So
we we say it's on. So it's keep counting
counting the clock signal. Whenever it
goes up, then it's considered to be
pressed. Then it goes count by one. On
the other side, we also connect the
button with a not sign to the reset
signal. A not gate to the reset signal.
This can be a not gate. But for many
digital circuit to represent this this
is zero reset. Whenever this is zero it
will reset. Okay. So zero reset
that means when is released then we
immediate reset it go backs to zero then
until next time we press it then we
start to count. Okay. So when it's going
jitter whenever it goes back to this
point for example then we consider it's
a zero then we reset everything then we
restart to count the time okay so this
jitter time takes about say just for
example one millisecond it's actually
shorter probably shorter than that this
takes one millisecond then we start to
count at this moment then when user
press it for one more millisecond then
we consider this is
this button is really pressed. Okay. So
here we simply use a counter to create a
delay effect, create a latency so that
we know when this button is really
uh being pressed.
Okay. So pretty much this type of
counter behind every button is required.
Every key on your keyboard is required.
Otherwise you just your computer never
know how many times to press the button.
Okay. So I'm just using counter as one
particular example to talk about uh a
building block of sequential logic that
as you can see there are many building
blocks of sequential logic that we
already talked about. They say a greater
than comparison. And if you this is a
combination logic. Then alou this
there's another combination logic. Okay.
So we have a counter here. This is one
uh building block. Then one passcode
matcher or string matcher. That is
another building block. Right? Then
those are building blocks later on that
we will talk about for building a CPU
core and a GPU core. Okay. As a summary,
at this point I pretty much pretty much
done with the key element of a digital
design course for undergraduate level.
Okay, for undergrad level this whole two
weeks probably is
should spend like eight weeks or
something to talk about whole thing and
even computational audio probably will
last four weeks or something and there
are many many different type of building
blocks that you can keep giving examples
and say how to build a mill machine out
of a moral machine how to convert back
and forth between mill machine and moral
machine those things can take a very
long time in digital design but as a
computer architecture you just know oh
this thing can happen it's good enough
right especially when AI is available
it's always more important to know
something is possible than know how
exactly something is done
uh so with this type of basic I think
we're ready to go with the core design
part of the CPU core and GPU core design
um then
I'm going to take a different route as
last year last year I start to talk
about the risk five ISA then computer
architecture simulation how to write
simulators I spend two weeks on that
then I talk then I start to talk about
core design that's after the spring
break so I think that's too late I'm
going to change this way that I'm going
to bring GPU architecture first now
actually GPU architecture is simpler is
complex in some way it's simpler in some
other ways so I'm I'm actually bring the
GPU architecture to to earlier time and
the CPU architecture to a later time. So
next lecture I'm going to talk about
the basics of GPU programming and how to
write a GPU program how to in principle
how GPU program works okay no advanced
topic just basic GPU programming don't
expect you can learn everything about
GPU programming in one course in one
lecture then we're going to spend two
lectures to talk about the GPU
architecture the GPU core design and the
GPU memory system. Okay, to give you a
very quick preview about how a computing
system works um how a vanoyman
architecture system works. So GPU is
still a vanoyman system. We talk about
vanoyman system give you a quick review
overview with the GPU architecture then
we move to a CPU architecture. You can
see how fancy CPU can do these days and
there are many many corner cases many
many optimization methods but GPU is
rather simple
okay then uh so that's the thing that we
talk today mainly we talk about finite
state machine and we can use finite
state machine it's a powerful tool or
powerful way to think about a system
okay uh by the way one more thing that I
have to say is when we talk about state
machine it's a way that
uh
that you consider this system when you
are simulating a computer architecture
you're actually simulating the
combination logic right so to you when
you write when you think about how a
system works so say a cache how a cache
works you think in a way that oh I
receive a signal Then uh I detect it's a
miss then I send to a memory wait a
little time then I come back then I send
to the top and I return the data right
this is how typically you think about a
cache works but this works in a way that
you are bringing your personality in the
cache that how you consider a human
system how a human society works is I
first do this I will do that I'll take
this course and they will take that that
you you have a continuous time way to
understand continuous way to understand
time. You have context, right? So for
combination logic, one principle here is
it has no context. All the context is
the register provides you.
Okay. So it's just imagine that
in one cycle you
um just think you you lose your memory.
Your brain is not working properly and
you can only remember a uh one day
thing. So in the evening you write down
a diary. Do you know oh I did this thing
today. In the morning you're a new
person. You can only read your diary to
see oh this is what I done I I did
yesterday. So I need to do these things
the next day. In the evening you write
down your your journal again. So the
next day you can pick it up. So
combination logic and also
uh computer architecture simulation
works in this type of state list. I I
don't I shouldn't call it stately. I
should call it contact to list way. So
every day every cycle is a new cycle.
Yeah. The only thing I know is what I
have written in my journal. The journal
is the register. I know my register. I
know the register provides this data. I
provide output
and this output becomes the journal of
next day.
Okay. Just a way to think about finite
state machine. It help you rethink many
system how it works. Okay.
Then uh state state transition diagram
and from state to next state state to
output we use combination logic design
which is true stable boolean logic
circuit something you are familiar with.
Okay that's everything that we need to
talk today. So, let's talk again next